- Session management vulnerabilities
are associated with web application based
client server systems.
Let's take a look at the vulnerabilities
and mitigations in this context.
To understand session management issues,
first let's look at how HTTP works.
HTTP is a stateless protocol
which means there is no user data
or other information stored between requests
in the web server.
In a pure stateless HTTP system,
each and every request is independent
of every other request, even if it's the same user
with the same browser in the same browsing session.
Some developers feel the need to maintain
some sort of state for the user
leading to the creation of the session.
The session is usually initiated
by some event on the website.
Authentication is usually that event
that starts the session and generates the unique token.
The server shares that token with the client
through a cookie.
Now every subsequent request from the client
to the server will send that cookie
and the token it contains.
The server can then use the token in that cookie
to look up the session state data.
The vulnerability that can exploit this process
is called session hijacking.
Session hijacking works by using the session's tokens
which are often created using random numbers.
If the random number generator isn't secure,
a bad actor can simply predict the value
of the session identifier for a user.
Once they can predict the pattern through an algorithm,
they can generate a seed session
and use it to grab the next user's session.
If you find yourself creating tokens for sessions,
you must verify that you are using
a secure random number generator.
Most languages have a general random
or pseudo random number generator and a secure one.
Always use the secure generator.
Lack of communication channel protection
can increase session management risks.
If you don't mark the session token cookie
to be secure, it may be passed over HTTP
instead of HTTPS.
Another issue is when you create the session
on first visit but don't create a new session
when the user logs in.
A session fixation attack can occur
as the pre authentication session token
would now point to an authenticated session.
Anyone who grabbed the session on plain HTTP traffic
could use it once you log in
even though that communication is now over HTTPS
with the secure flag now on the cookie
between the real user and the server.
Session creation isn't the only weak point.
Session termination also exposes potential risks.
A developer must ensure that when the use logs out
the session is invalidated.
If not, the session token can still be stolen
and used by a bad actor even if the user
is no longer interacting with the system.
Likewise, sessions should expire after
some period of inactivity.
If the user leaves the browser open
but is no longer using the site,
there's a risk of the token being stolen
and used by someone else.
In such cases, developers should provide timeouts
for inactive sessions to protect the user.
While this may frustrate a user to see the timeout,
they are more secure when we destroy the session.
Just be open to iterating on the timeout value
to keep your users as happy as possible
while still being secure.
Very rarely do users actually log out of sites.
Instead, they just close their browsers
therefore their sessions remain active
and can be stolen.
A developer should invalidate the session
when the browser closes
to ensure the session cannot be stolen.
Now we don't always use sessions in web development
but when we do, we need to be aware of the risks.
Protecting users in these situations isn't hard
but you have to think about the risks
and make a global plan.